>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory.
And we have a very special guest
for you today, Dr. Ken Hanson.
He's a professor, of course,
and heads up Treasures in Time,
which really deals with biblical
prophecy and incredible things
that he has been researching.
Ken, welcome.
It's good to see you
in the flesh again.
>>KEN HANSON: Good to be here
in the flesh again, George.
>>NOORY: I mean, you've
been such a great guest
on the radio program.
>>HANSON: Always a pleasure.
>>NOORY: Just
remarkable, your work.
>>HANSON: Always
great to talk to you.
>>NOORY: We're going to talk
about a lot of different things
today, and we're
going to highlight
some special things about the
Torah and what it all means,
but I want to talk with you for
a little bit about something
that scares the living
daylights out of people
and that's end times prophecy.
And so many people say, Ken,
you're in end times right now.
It's over for all of us.
Where are we with that?
>>HANSON: Where
are we with that?
Well, somebody
asked a great rabbi
when will the messiah come?
When will the end be?
And he answered, every day.
But when?
When?
Can you give me a clue?
And he said, when we make the
world ready to receive Him,
that's the human goal.
That's our burden.
>>NOORY: We're not
ready for that yet.
>>HANSON: We have to
actually repair the world
to appoint where we're ready
to receive the messiah,
the Anointed One, One who
will sit on David's throne.
I can tell you that
traditional Judaism, and that
includes modern Judaism, tends
to shy away from eschatology
and the end time.
And why is that?
Because Judaism, as it's
evolved and developed
through the centuries, wants
to focus on the here and now.
It's life right now that's
important, how we live today.
>>NOORY: I agree with that.
>>HANSON: And if
we live correctly,
if we live well, the good life,
the [HEBREW],, we say in Hebrew,
then the world to come
will take care of itself.
But Jews talk about this
as the world to come,
and it is an
important affirmation
in Judaism all
through the centuries,
from the days of the
great rabbi Maimonides all
the way to the present.
"I believe with perfect
faith," said Maimonides,
"in the coming of the messiah."
This is essential.
There is a world to come,
because let's face it,
we're messed up.
Now when will that--
>>NOORY: There's no
doubt about that.
>>HANSON: No doubt about that.
When will it be?
Well, that gets into
one branch of Judaism
called Kabbalah,
Jewish mysticism.
And the mystics have
generally felt that history
is a 6,000 year cycle.
And if you actually
go back and do
the strict biblical chronology,
we're already in the year 5776.
We're getting on, and we've
got another couple of centuries
plus before we actually
get to the final year.
Now, that's according to strict
mystical Judaism Kabbalah.
>>NOORY: So we don't have
to worry about it right now.
>>HANSON: But then
again, who knows?
Because that's just
one interpretation,
and the thing about Judaism
is that there are many--
>>NOORY: Interpretations?
>>HANSON: Yeah, and I like that.
And that's what's nice about
it, because no one can say
and you can't say you're
wrong, you're wrong, I'm right.
Who knows?
>>NOORY: We don't
want them to be right.
>>HANSON: God only knows.
>>NOORY: We don't
want end times, do we?
>>HANSON: Exactly.
And there other
interpretations that
would put the end
much, much nearer.
After all, there are
major milestones.
There is the rebirth of the
Jewish state in the year 1948.
>>NOORY: '48, that's when
the clock started, right?
>>HANSON: After 2,000 years
of dispersion and suffering.
There's also the Holocaust.
Horrible, milestone,
however, in,
if you want to think
about it, prophecy.
Then, of course, there's the
reunification of Jerusalem
in 1967, the June 1967 War.
>>NOORY: So the signs are there.
>>HANSON: So yes,
the signs are there,
and especially as we
go back into history.
Judaism has changed a
lot as it's evolved.
As I mentioned, it's
much less inclined
to talk about such things,
but in the days of Jesus
and the centuries
even before Jesus,
who was a historical
character in ancient Judaism,
there was a much
greater sensitivity
to this kind of apocalyptic
ideology within Judaism.
And honestly, they
believed back then
that we are in a great cosmic
struggle, a great conflict
between powers of good and
evil, between the Sons of Light
as the Dead Sea sect likes
to refer to themselves
and the Sons of Darkness
And then the Apostle
Paul, who even though we
think of him as a Christian,
he was a good Jewish guy
back in his day.
And he talked about
powers and principalities
that we're constantly
at battle with.
And they had a sense,
even in the first century,
that we've got maybe
a generation, if that,
before the end.
Well, didn't quite
pan out that way,
but nonetheless, because
of that imminent idea
that the end is near,
we do know historically
that this early
Judeo-Christian Nazarene
sect, as I like
to refer to them,
took those warnings seriously.
They fled from the
city of Jerusalem
in the first century
of the Common Era
just within a generation
of Jesus himself.
They were convinced
this was the end,
and because they
fled Jerusalem, they
were not caught up in the
great revolt that would
have massacred all of them.
>>NOORY: Every
civilization believes
that they are in the end
times, every civilization.
It hasn't stopped.
>>HANSON: It hasn't stopped.
And one of these days, if
you believe the great Rabbi
Maimonides--
>>NOORY: The last one
will be the right one.
>>HANSON: The last one will
be the right one, the messiah,
the Anointed One, one who will
sit on the throne of David,
even as the great prophet
Isaiah declared that from Zion
shall go forth the Torah.
That all nations will come up
and worship the divine presence
in Israel.
That, as we read on the face
of the United Nations building
in New York, quoting
from the prophet Isaiah,
"nations shall not lift
up sword against nation,
neither shall they
learn war anymore."
>>NOORY: That would be nice.
>>HANSON: That's
the prophet Isaiah.
>>NOORY: Tell me about
the Book of Revelation.
How did it get written, and
what does that mean to us?
>>HANSON: The Book
of Revelation--
lot of speculation about
who wrote it and when.
Now, I'm going to go out
on a limb academically
and take a very minority
view, but I like the idea
that there was, as it were,
a 13th disciple of Jesus--
>>NOORY: Really?
Not 12?
>>HANSON: --hiding in the
shadows by the name of John.
Now, this is not John the
Galilean, the fisherman.
This is a John who had some
close contact with the Dead Sea
sect, that is the
Dead Sea Scrolls.
That is also John
the Baptist, who had
a very apocalyptic mentality.
The end is near.
This is all over the
Dead Sea Scrolls.
If we read what is attributed
to John the Baptist
in the gospels, he's talking
about fire and brimstone
to come down and judge humanity.
And it's soon, it's soon coming.
There was a disciple of John
the Baptist, another John, whom
I believe was a Jewish priest.
>>NOORY: This is
the 13th person.
>>HANSON: This is
the 13th person
who is responsible for
the Gospel of John.
>>NOORY: He doesn't show up in
the picture of the Last Supper.
>>HANSON: Well.
We've got some
telltale evidence.
He shows up at the Resurrection.
>>NOORY: Maybe he's the
one who took the picture.
>>HANSON: Could be.
Could be.
But we're told even at the
time of the Resurrection
and the empty tomb of
Jesus that the disciples--
Mary is running up ahead
and Peter rushes in.
John is first, but he stops.
He does not enter the tomb.
Why is that?
Because a priest is not to have
contact with a deceased body,
a corpse, and he doesn't know.
And that's a little
detail in the Gospels
that is just missed.
We would think--
>>NOORY: And they didn't
know he was gone, right?
>>HANSON: Exactly.
So here's this
mysterious 13th disciple,
and he writes not only
his memoirs, which
become the Gospel of John,
but he also produces something
else while in exile
on the Isle of Patmos
that we call the
Book of Revelation.
Very apocalyptic and contains--
>>NOORY: Very scary.
>>HANSON: Scary and
contains precise warnings
to those early
followers of Jesus.
When you see armies surrounding
Jerusalem, said Jesus himself,
flee into the hills.
Well, people who don't
know their history
have no idea what is
being referred to,
and they're trying to somehow
fit this into modern times.
But hey, there
was a great revolt
in the first century
of the Common Era that
broke out against Rome.
The Jews rose up
66 AD against Rome.
And Rome came in the
days of the Emperor Nero
and put it down ferociously.
Now Nero, if you put his name
in Hebrew, is Neron Kaisar.
And in Kabbalah, that
is, Jewish mysticism,
every letter has
a numerical value.
Well, you add up those
Hebrew letters of Nero Kaisar
take it out of Latin,
put it in Hebrew,
Neron Kaisar becomes 666.
>>NOORY: Oh, the
sign of the beast.
>>HANSON: There you go.
And those early followers,
whom I really think
had at least parts of what we
call the Book of Revelation
today as prophetic
warnings to them-- again,
I'm going out on a
limb here academically,
but it's entirely
feasible that they
took those warnings seriously.
And we are told by
other historians
that they fled Jerusalem.
They went eastward
across the Jordan River
into a city called
Pella in Transjordan.
And they alone were saved
from the destruction that
befell the city in the year
70 of the Common Era, when
the temple was destroyed.
Josephus tells us that one
million Jews were slaughtered
in that Roman campaign,
and that would
have annihilated this entire
Judeo-Christian movement
with it.
>>NOORY: At the time, yeah.
>>HANSON: There would be
no Christian face today,
arguably, had they stayed
in the city of Jerusalem
and not believed themselves
that these are the end of days.
That this is the end time.
>>NOORY: Now, are we in end
times now, in your opinion?
>>HANSON: Coming from
traditional Judaism,
we don't know.
Personally, I'm alarmed at
what I'm seeing round about.
>>NOORY: Really?
You're seeing this?
You're seeing the--
>>HANSON: On a personal
level, I am alarmed.
I can't say that
academically, and I can't even
say it Jewishly, because
we focus on today,
on the here and now.
But there are things going
on in this world that
are more alarming
than certainly,
in my short lifetime,
I've ever experienced.
>>NOORY: So you see signs?
>>HANSON: The nuclear
threat, of course,
and then on, I think,
the good side, we
have the establishment
of Jerusalem
or the recognition of Jerusalem,
at last, as Israel's capital
by the United States
government, but even this
is an incendiary thing.
>>NOORY: What
happened to Tel Aviv?
>>HANSON: What
Well, we were, of
course, reticent
even to recognize Jerusalem
as Israel's capital.
So we'll just put our
embassy in Tel Aviv.
And there it sat, even though
Congress, many years ago,
voted that Jerusalem should
be the capital, recognized
as the capital.
We didn't have an actual
presidential proclamation
that now is the time until now.
But even that is an
incendiary thing.
>>NOORY: That's a
warning, isn't it?
>>HANSON: Sure.
>>NOORY: A timetable war.
>>HANSON: And we
throw archeology
then into the mix,
which is another part
of this incendiary
thing going on.
Archeology is taking place
in the city of Jerusalem now
which is contested, because
Jerusalem is supposed
to be a divided city, if ever
a Palestinian state is created.
And yet, the richest archeology
being undertaken as we speak
is over the Green Line,
over the Green Line
into the part that
is supposed to be
the new state of Palestine.
So here, archeology meets modern
geopolitics right in the face.
It's unbelievable.
And yes, it has potential--
>>NOORY: How did they know this?
>>HANSON: --to spark conflict.
>>NOORY: Who was Isaiah?
>>HANSON: Who was Isaiah?
He was, I would argue, the
greatest prophet ever to exist.
He was the one
who gave us firmly
what we call monotheism today.
We cannot overestimate
the importance of Isaiah.
He was a member of the ruling
class back in ancient Israel,
in the 700s BC, that is,
before the Common Era
in the days of King Ahaz and
another King, maybe we've
heard of, called Hezekiah.
And he lived at this time.
And here he was, this member
of an aristocratic family,
and yet, he chastised his
people and at the same time,
identified with the lowly,
the underclass, the oppressed.
And he gave us a new
religious sensitivity
that was as revolutionary as
the wheel in human civilization.
>>NOORY: Who is exactly Isaiah?
>>NARRATOR: As the age
of prophecy unfolds,
we find ourselves
in the year 742 BCE.
The place, the
temple in Jerusalem.
A man named Isaiah is
called by God to prophesies,
and he has a fateful vision.
>>WOMAN: "I saw the Lord seated
on a throne high and exalted,
and the skirt of his
robe filled the temple.
Seraphim were in
attendance on Him.
One of the seraphim
touched my mouth and said,
this has touched your lips.
Now your iniquity is removed,
and your sin is wiped out."
Isaiah 6:1.
>>NARRATOR: The book of Isaiah
is the longest prophetic text
in the Bible.
Isaiah's voice is a perpetual
plea for peace and tolerance.
His prophecies are
an enduring legacy
that are relevant even today.
It is from Isaiah that one
of the greatest quotations
has come down to us
through the ages.
>>WOMAN: "They will
beat their swords
into plowshares and their
spears into pruning hooks.
Nation will not take up
sword against nation,
nor will they
learn war anymore."
Isaiah 2:4.
>>NOORY: They will
not know war anymore.
>>HANSON: Anymore.
And he gave us this concept of
the Messianic Age, a messiah,
an anointed one,
someone who will
sit on the throne of
the great King David
and really bring
a universal peace.
Now, bear in mind, this is in
the midst of a sea of paganism.
There was no monotheism known
to anyone in those days.
>>NOORY: No
>>HANSON: And all you had were
various gods and goddesses who
represent the physical forces
of the universe, the sun,
the moon, the babbling brook,
whatever, the atmosphere,
whether it's Mesopotamia
or Egypt or Canaan.
And these gods are all
at war with one another.
They're fickle.
They're capricious.
So basically, everyone is simply
at the hands of fickle fate.
>>NOORY: Why can't
the prophecies
give us specific dates?
>>HANSON: Because it's the
concept and the idea that's
most important.
That God, as we
understand the divine,
is really not part of
this physical universe.
Is completely
separate, is other,
who sits above and
beyond human civilization
and who actually judges the
world with righteousness,
with justice.
That's more important
than any dates,
as far as the prophets
are concerned.
And I should add that that
concept became ensconced
in Western thought and culture.
It was picked up by great
Renaissance philosophers,
by Enlightenment philosophers.
John Locke developed
the idea of natural law.
This is incredible.
He took these religious ideas
of the greatest prophet of all,
and he secularized
them, but he said,
look, there is a law
that's above everything,
a justice and a righteousness.
And one person,
even any individual
can stand up with a Torah
or a Bible in his hand
and say the rest of
you have missed it,
because you have
oppressed those who are
weak and defenseless among you.
That's the revolutionary idea.
And the United States
of America, of course,
embraced those ideas
and embellished them
and placed them into our own
Declaration of Independence,
talking about God and
the law of nature's God.
And the Constitution--
>>NOORY: But they fight that.
>>HANSON: Natural law
is an amazing concept.
It's in the universe.
Where did this come from?
And I should add
Martin Luther King--
the whole concept of civil
rights and justice and equality
of all people, where
did this come from?
>>NOORY: But nowadays,
Ken, when you
talk about the Pledge of
Allegiance, for example,
"liberty and justice for
all," talk about one God,
they frown on this.
Why?
What's happening?
>>HANSON: Well, thank Isaiah
that it's there to begin with.
But what we've tried to do is
to secularize these concepts,
and so we don't want to mention
the source of natural law.
Well, John Locke,
as a philosopher,
he didn't-- he wasn't a
preacher or a theologian.
He didn't talk about
God, God, God, God.
You don't have to,
but he knew where
the source came from and so
did our founders and framers.
Many of them were deists.
Some of them had
no formal religion,
but everybody came
from a consensus
that there is a divine order
out there in the universe,
and that did not exist until the
Israelite prophets came along.
They are the most
incredible phenomenon,
perhaps in human history,
because they were born out
of nowhere, just didn't
exist in the ancient world.
They just cropped
up, Isaiah, and then
a slew of others
in his footsteps,
and then they vanished,
also out of nowhere.
>>NOORY: As quickly
as they appear.
>>HANSON: As quickly
>>NOORY: Isaiah's seal.
>>NARRATOR: In December 2015,
Jerusalem archaeologist Eilat
Mazar announced the discovery of
an ancient clay seal or bulla.
The bulla contained an
astonishing inscription.
It read, "belonging to Hezekiah,
son of Ahaz, King of Judah."
This tiny artifact carried
a sensational message.
This seal proved
the existence of one
of ancient Judah's
greatest kings
and proved the accuracy
of the biblical record.
Dr. Mazar didn't
know it at the time,
but another bulla, bearing
an intriguing inscription
was waiting to be placed
under her microscope.
The Old Testament record
shows that King Hezekiah
was a contemporary
of Isaiah the prophet
the biblical books of Kings,
Chronicles, and Isaiah
show that this prophet played
a central role in Hezekiah's
remarkable reign over Judah.
Today, we have indisputable
scientific evidence
proving the existence
of King Hezekiah,
but what about Hezekiah
as chief counselor
and one of the Bible's
greatest prophets?
Is there archaeological
evidence proving the existence
of the prophet Isaiah?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NOORY: You would say yes.
>>HANSON: Now I would, and this
is very exciting and of course,
also very controversial.
I like to tell my students,
we can never really understand
an idea or a concept unless
we understand also what
it's pitted against,
because everything
is a great debate, especially
in the academic world.
>>NOORY: Oh, my gosh, constant.
>>HANSON: And I can
tell you that there
are a whole lot of what we
call Biblical minimalists.
This is very much in
vogue, and I would even
call them the majority
now, who essentially
minimize anything and
everything in the biblical text.
There are those who
say, Isaiah, well,
there wasn't just a
single prophet Isaiah.
There were multiple Isaiahs.
There was a second Isaiah
from chapters 40 through 66.
>>NOORY: They were all
called Isaiah, right.
>>HANSON: And they
were all called Isaiah.
There was a Trito-Isaiah
from chapters 55 through 66.
Then the first Isaiah,
the first so many--
29 chapters are also subdivided,
five different groups
of various Isaiah prophets.
So one scholar even says
that the historical Isaiah
has vanished, and
it's all in vogue
to say that sort of thing.
And suddenly, out of nowhere,
when we least expect it,
we have a tiny
little seal, a bulla,
discovered in the excavations
at the south end of the Temple
Mount.
>>NOORY: How big would that be?
>>HANSON: It's not a
half an inch in diameter.
Can you imagine?
>>NOORY: What we just
saw was just a half
an inch in diameter?
>>HANSON: It's a half
an inch in diameter.
>>NOORY: Almost like a
little quarter, right?
>>HANSON: Yeah, and it was
thrown out of a royal bakery
adjacent to the palace of
King Hezekiah in the 700s
before the Common Era.
And there it lay undisturbed
for thousands of years
until Jerusalem is conquered
by the Israelis in 1967.
>>NOORY: Now, what's the
significance of the seal,
basically.
>>HANSON: Well, now, we
have a little clay object.
It's a stamp, just like
the founders of America
would put a stamp
on the parchment,
right, to say it's sealed.
>>NOORY: Yeah, like
a notary would.
>>HANSON: Like a
notary, precisely.
But it says, plain
as day, [HEBREW]
which means of or for Isaiah.
The next part of it underneath
is the complicated part,
because we read in
Hebrew [HEBREW],,
three Hebrew letters [HEBREW].
Well, I want to pronounce that
prophet, Isaiah the prophet.
Except [HEBREW],, prophet, is
spelled with an extra letter
at the end, an aleph,
and it's not there.
However, tiny as this
seal is, the part where
that letter would be
has been rubbed away,
because it was wet
clay at the time,
and there is a
fingerprint there.
Someone had touched
that wet piece of clay.
>>NOORY: On purpose.
>>HANSON: No, just affixing
it to the parchment
or the papyrus.
Stick it down on it.
>>NOORY: Oh, to push it down.
>>HANSON: And his
fingerprint, got left,
and it smudged away that
last letter, whatever it was.
Now, this is even
more intriguing,
because if this is
the letter aleph,
then it's no doubt that
this is Isaiah the prophet.
And do you suppose
that we might now
have the fingerprint
of the prophet Isaiah?
>>NOORY: That is amazing.
>>HANSON: That is a smoking gun.
And what about all
those minimalists
who say that the historical
Isaiah has vanished?
There was just a
school of Isaiah,
people calling
themselves Isaiah.
We have the actual ancient
Martin Luther King.
He was that important.
Just as Martin Luther
King knew presidents,
the ancient prophet knew kings,
he knew King Ahaz, King Ahaz,
and he made a prophecy to King
Ahaz, one of the most famous,
that says a maiden
shall be with child.
[HEBREW] Emmanuel,
it says in Hebrew.
>>NOORY: When was that done?
>>HANSON: That was in,
also, the early 700s BCE,
but you shall call his name--
>>NOORY: Way before Christ.
>>HANSON: [SPEAKING HEBREW],, you
shall call his name Emmanuel.
Wow, and what is the
significance of all of that?
There is someone
whose name will be
God is with us, who will come.
And he says don't
worry, King Ahaz,
because by the time this
child knows right from wrong,
those enemies whom you
fear-- in those days,
the King of the northern
tribes and the King
of Syria, who were attacking
Judah in the south,
they will be kaput essentially.
So don't worry about them.
>>NOORY: But they were talking
about the birth of Jesus,
no doubt.
>>HANSON: This is where
it gets interesting,
because Christians,
of course, see
that as the birth of Jesus,
but then not everyone
is a Christian.
And what, in fact, was
Isaiah talking about?
Maybe there's a
hidden reference,
as far as Christians are
concerned, the Book of Jesus,
but do you think Isaiah
had that in mind?
He's thinking of
his own day and age,
and in his day, who would
be this child who was born?
Most scholars will tell
you it was probably
the next King along the line,
King Hezekiah, who we just
saw in the video, [HEBREW],,
and we have his seal also,
which lays not 10 feet
away from the Isaiah seal.
They're, like, adjacent
to each other, found
in the same strata
of the archeology
because the King and the
prophet knew each other.
>>NOORY: Was there a King David?
Did he exist?
>>HANSON: That's also contested.
>>NOORY: Let's take a look.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>FRANCESCA
STAVRAKOPOULOU: There
is one figure in
the Hebrew Bible
who divides opinion
like no other.
To many, he's a simple shepherd
boy who defeated a giant.
But for modern Israelis,
David is a founding father,
a hero whose star adorns
their national flag.
The Hebrew scriptures
describe how
he united the tribes of
Israel into one nation
and made Jerusalem his capital.
But the account of King
David in the Hebrew Bible,
once considered a
timeless record,
is built on shifting sands.
Modern archeology is challenging
the historical accuracy
of the Bible, and this
has huge implications
for the region and the world.
>>ISRAEL FINKELSTEIN: There
is very little evidence
for the empire of King
David in Jerusalem.
Around it is the
most excavated piece
of land on the
face of the Earth.
Still, a century and a
half reveal very little.
>>STAVRAKOPOULOU: But
for many Israelis,
archeology is also a way to
prove their claim to this land.
>>MAN: If anything
we've ever found
in Israel, this really
sheds light on King David
and on his first
empire in Jerusalem.
>>STAVRAKOPOULOU: In a
country as fought over
and contested as
Israel, David's legacy,
as set out in the
Bible, is ammunition
in an ideological war.
But some scholars are
questioning the Bible's version
of events.
They claim David's kingdom may
not have been vast or united.
Can we even talk about an
historical David at all?
>>NOORY: Is this the same
David who killed Goliath?
>>HANSON: Same one, same one.
>>NOORY: Well, he
was real, wasn't he?
>>HANSON: Well, if we listen
to our minimalist friends,
like Israel Finkelstein, who
was just speaking on our video
there, David was probably about
as historical as King Arthur.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HANSON: A lot of
legends about him but--
>>NOORY: Very mystical.
>>HANSON: --if there
were a King Arthur,
he was probably just a
local chieftain somewhere.
If there were a King
David, he might have just
been sitting on a
hilltop in a tent,
and his kingdom might have
existed perhaps mythologically,
maybe just a few acres.
>>NOORY: Why?
Why do we have these
two different views?
>>HANSON: Because
the minimalists,
our minimalist friends--
and they're good scholars,
I know some of them--
will say, look, where
is the evidence?
Skepticism is rampant,
as it should be, in fact.
Show me--
>>NOORY: Are they
saying that there's--
>>HANSON: Where's the
beef, they will ask.
Where's the beef?
So show me the archeology
that supports David.
All we have are
some biblical texts.
Just like King Arthur, show me.
>>NOORY: Well, there
may not be any.
Who knows?
Doesn't mean he doesn't exist.
>>HANSON: Well, we've got
the city of Jerusalem,
and that is ground zero
in terms of archeology.
It's also ground zero
in geopolitics today.
>>NOORY: It sure is.
>>HANSON: And also
on our video, we
just saw some of those
involved in the excavation
to the south end of the Temple
Mount, just a tad further south
of where the Isaiah seal was
found, we call it [HEBREW],,
David's City.
And the excavators have actually
gone way down underneath,
digging tunnels.
This is Indiana
Jones kind of stuff.
Like in the old days,
literally digging tunnels,
and there is some
good reason to believe
that they may have found
the palace of King David
and his son, Solomon and that
it was a massive structure.
>>NOORY: Well,
then he does exist.
>>HANSON: If they are right.
But this is where the
controversy comes in.
And as I say, you can never
understand an idea or concept
unless you understand
what it's pitted against.
That's when it gets interesting.
>>NOORY: What does
Dr. Ken Hanson say?
Did David exist?
>>HANSON: I'm down
with saying he did.
>>NOORY: The story of David
and Goliath, did that happen?
>>HANSON: I'm down with
saying that these stories rest
on something historical.
Now, whether every
detail is correct--
these are not written
as history books.
These are not written as
history books to begin with.
They're written as
religious texts.
But when it comes--
and by the way, we have George
Washington and his story
of chopping down the
cherry tree and throwing
the silver dollar
across the Potomac,
and does that really bother me?
No.
Whether or not
that happened, I'm
a Washington fan, by the way.
I'm a real George
Washington fan.
Yes, he existed,
and by the way, we
wouldn't have the United
States without him.
I'll go on record as
saying that, as well.
>>NOORY: I agree with that.
>>HANSON: One man, that's
how important David was.
>>NOORY: If David did not exist,
big if, if he did not exist,
what does that mean?
>>HANSON: We would
have to invent him,
because great nations
and great peoples
don't, in general,
crop out of nowhere.
Just like Moses, he's also in
contest, contested controversy.
Nations need founders.
They need leaders and
hence, George Washington,
hence Moses, hence David.
It would be hard to explain how
this people, Israel, survived
and even survived
destruction and exile
and captivity without
at least the memory,
and this also dovetails with
the idea of the messiah.
That's what Isaiah
was all about.
He lived well after King
David, but he's saying, look,
someday, someday, someone
will sit on that same throne
that David established and like
David, he will bring peace.
Even better than David,
he'll bring world peace.
>>NOORY: Why is prophecy so
important in Jewish mysticism?
>>HANSON: Well, "prophecy,"
as a word itself,
that word, "navi," which
means prophet, it comes
from the Hebrew verb [HEBREW],,
which means to foretell,
not just to foretell, but to
forth tell, to speak forth.
I think of it more as the Martin
Luther King type of prophet.
That is the proper understanding
of biblical prophecy.
But the mystics come along, and
they are much more interested
in finding an intimacy
with the divine,
knowing secrets that are
not known to everybody else.
And among those
secrets, of course,
are the messiah, the messiah.
When will this messiah come?
And when you're asking that
question, well, ipso facto,
you're asking, when
will the end be?
And there have been
multiple Jewish messiahs
down through history.
There was one in the 1600s.
His name was
Sabbatai Zevi, and he
proclaimed that he was, in
fact, the Jewish messiah.
And it was an enormous movement.
We believe that in his
day, the majority of Jews
worldwide believed that
he was the messiah.
The end was near,
and they actually
began selling all of
their possessions.
They got on ships
all over Europe,
and they began converging
in wooden ships on Palestine
in those days, because they
believed that this was it.
This was the end.
The false messiah, as
we know now, himself,
was captured by the Turks
and brought in chains
before the sultan and given
the option, the ultimatum,
choose Allah or die.
And he chose Allah.
He converted to Islam.
>>NOORY: Ken, why
is the planned move
of the embassy, our embassy,
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem
so controversial?
>>HANSON: Because the other
side, the Palestinian side,
denies that there ever
was a temple in Jerusalem,
that there ever was a
King David, many of them.
They're certainly on
the minimalist side.
So all of this idea linking
Jews with this land of Israel
is an imaginary history, exactly
as our minimalist friends say.
>>NOORY: Which they want
the world to believe.
>>HANSON: Well, exactly, because
Jews should not have a right
to this city and this land.
They have actually
come in and taken it
from Palestinian people,
that's their argument.
And consequently, if the
United States and other nations
begin to recognize Jerusalem
as Israel's capital, what
does that say about the
whole east side of Jerusalem,
which is largely
Arab in population?
Which in a new state, by
the way, would be divided--
the city of Jerusalem would
have to be divided, according
to the two-state Jerusalem.
>>NOORY: Well, it's the
right thing to do, isn't it?
>>HANSON: Well, if it
happens, what that does
is to turn Jerusalem
into the new Berlin,
and it would have
walls and checkpoints.
>>NOORY: That's the
unfortunate part.
>>HANSON: What about
the holy sites?
The holiest site
in all of Judaism,
which is the wall, of
course, the great Western
Wall, that's in the Arab side.
Are we going to put an
international border
right at the Western Wall, and
we think that's going to hold?
This is why I'm
so skittish and, I
hate to say, afraid,
not as a scholar,
mind you, but just as a
person about apocalyptic kind
of prognoses.
Because when that
happens, if that happens--
they call it a peace
process, I'm sorry.
I see it as a war
process, and it
could be a war to end all
wars focused on ground zero,
right where David's palace
is, where the Isaiah seal was
found, et cetera.
It's not a pretty picture.
>>NOORY: Should we be putting
an embassy in Jerusalem?
>>HANSON: In a word, yes,
because it's the right thing
to do.
And what we find
archaeologically, substantiates
the claim, and let
me say, the Jewish
claim on not just West
Jerusalem but the whole city
of Jerusalem, even the sites
where Muslims have holy sites.
Now, I've been there many times.
I respect Islam.
I have great respect for Islam
as a faith and as a religion.
I've been in those holy sites.
I've prayed in the
mosques, in fact.
It's OK for a Jew
to do that, in fact
because we're praying
to the same God, Allah.
But in terms of the politics
that are involved here,
I'm sorry.
There was a Jewish land here.
There was a Jewish temple
here, and there should be,
in my opinion, one
unified city of Jerusalem.
To divide it is going to
bring on the end, I think,
sooner that we hope.
>>NOORY: Can we unify it?
Can we make a Jerusalem for
Palestinians and Israelis
and make it work?
>>HANSON: We sure can if
we have the will to do it.
Now, Jerusalem has been formally
annexed by the state of Israel,
even though the Palestinian
Authority doesn't accept that,
but it has been
formally annexed.
And you know what?
A large number, I'd
say the great majority
of East Jerusalem Arabs have
taken Israeli citizenship.
They have full citizenship
in the state of Israel.
They even have representatives
in the Israeli Knesset.
And yes, there is trouble.
Yes, there is trouble.
There are stabbings that
continue, even recently.
I follow this all the time.
But--
>>NOORY: Look at what
happens in our cities,
for crying out loud.
>>HANSON: But there is relative
peace, and let me tell you,
I would let my kids play in
the streets of Jerusalem much
easier, with a
clearer conscience
than in many places in New York.
>>NOORY: Ken, in 1948,
when the state of Israel
was formed, should
we have, as a world,
carved out something
for the Palestinians
somewhere at the same time?
>>HANSON: That was what was put
forward to the United Nations
at the time.
It was a two-state
solution back then.
There would be a
Jewish state created,
and there would be an
Arab state created,
and the borders were carved
out, as well, at that time.
>>NOORY: What happened?
>>HANSON: The Arab
side rejected.
The Jewish side accepted the
United Nations partition plan.
The Arab side, sadly, rejected.
>>NOORY: Because they still
wanted where Israel was.
>>HANSON: Because
they could have
had everything that they wanted
and more had they agreed.
But instead what happened was
that the Hashemite kingdom
of Jordan annexed the
area that was supposed
to be the Palestinian state.
It was Jordanian, in
fact, up until 1967.
>>NOORY: '67 Israeli
got that back.
>>HANSON: Even so, the
borders were tenuous at best.
Up until the 1967 war, there
was about nine to 11 miles
from the Mediterranean Sea
to the border of Jordan,
and that was the Jewish state,
separating Galilee in the north
from Judea in the south.
That's the country, 9 to
11 miles wide, a strip.
How defensible is that?
>>NOORY: Israel has
basically told Iran,
you are not going to get nukes.
And they've warned
them about that.
Could that be the beginning
of the apocalypse?
>>HANSON: If you have
an apocalyptic mindset,
it sure could.
And I hate to go there,
because-- and again,
looking at Isaiah, Isaiah
is an interesting character,
because on the one hand, he
delivers apocalyptic messages.
Isaiah 24, beginning,
is a whole apocalyptic--
they call it the little
apocalypse of the prophet
Isaiah.
And yet, at the same time, he
has this triumphant message of,
look, the Torah is going
to go forth from Jerusalem,
and all the peoples
will stream up
to come to the knowledge
of the God of Israel.
He's conflicted, and
that's exactly what
I cope with just
as an individual,
as a person, the idea and
the dream of real peace
in the Messianic Age.
But you know, I'll
tell you this--
even orthodox rabbis,
much as we don't
like to get apocalyptic, have
this concept of what they call
[SPEAKING HEBREW],, the
pangs of the messiah.
And this is in Talmud, mind you.
Now, Christians talk about
the great tribulation
prior to the second coming.
This is the Jewish version,
that before the messiah comes,
there will be pangs,
like birth pangs,
and there will be violence
as we've never seen.
There will be a
lack of knowledge.
There will be youth
disrespecting their elders.
>>NOORY: Sounds like now.
>>HANSON: Deprivation
of all kinds,
and that is traditional Judaism.
It just doesn't
say exactly when.
So we look and we watch,
and we're conflicted again,
because on the one hand, I look
at what's going on with Iran.
This is terrifying.
And we add North
Korea into that.
This is a terrifying mix.
But on the other hand,
hey, I go back to Isaiah.
There is hope.
There is optimism.
We're never to lose that hope.
When will the messiah come?
When we make the world
ready to receive Him.
We have to keep trying.
We have to keep reaching
out, even to enemies
and even to build
interfaith understanding,
I'm big into that.
>>NOORY: Tell me about one
of the greatest discoveries,
I think, of all time,
the Dead Sea Scrolls.
>>HANSON: My goodness,
the greatest discoveries
happen when you
least expect them.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>HANSON: And you don't need
sensationalism, I always
say, to find the sensational.
Sensational is all
around us, you just
have to open your eyes.
Out of the blue, in the
middle of the 20th century,
just around the formation or
the vote on the state of Israel,
the same year, we've
got an Arab shepherd lad
by the name of Muhammed
ed-Dib is his name.
>>NOORY: In a cave,
goes in a cave.
>>HANSON: He's searching
around for a lost goat
and goes into a cave and
finds this whole series
of earthenware jars leaning
up against the cave wall
in the inner, darkened recesses
and discovers the first of-- he
doesn't know what they are.
He pulls out a series of wadded
up old, leathery parchments.
He can't read them.
He speaks Arabic.
He doesn't know Hebrew.
>>NOORY: And they're put
in little containers.
>>HANSON: They're in
jars, in clay jars,
uncannily preserved
for 2,000 years.
And he discovers the first
of this entire library
from the days of Jesus and John
the Baptist and Herod the Great
and the Romans and this
whole cast of characters
and they're 90%
of them in Hebrew.
Hebrew, which is what
brings me into the mix.
Hebrew hasn't changed in
2,000, even 3,000 years.
I look at that Isaiah seal
and the Hezekiah seal,
I can read that, because
this is the same language
that we speak in Israel today.
So I get up close and personal
with the Dead Sea Scrolls
and oh, yeah,
we're good friends,
the Scrolls and I. This
is Hebrew, and by the way,
I think Jesus spoke
not just Aramaic,
I think he spoke Hebrew, too,
and I think he taught in it.
And what an illumination on
this entire period that gave us
Judaism, Christianity, Islam.
>>NOORY: We still
don't know everything
about the Dead Sea Scrolls.
>>NARRATOR: There are
several different theories
on the origin of these texts.
The predominating theory
is that the scrolls were
the work of a Jewish
sect called the Essenes,
who it is believed
resided in nearby Qumran
and that the scrolls were
hidden away in the caves
to protect them from the
advancing Roman army.
Other theories for the
writers of the scrolls
include early Messianics,
or Christians,
or Zadokite priests.
A newer theory is
that the scrolls
were from various libraries
and synagogues in Jerusalem
about 15 miles from the caves.
>>NOORY: Fascinating.
>>HANSON: Fascinating.
>>NOORY: No matter
what theory you
believe it's all fascinating.
>>HANSON: Well, I did
my doctorate, actually,
in Dead Sea Scroll
research, and this continues
to be the number one
focus of everything I do,
but it leads in so many
different directions.
Prior to that period, after that
period, all through history,
we have this incredible
living legacy.
>>NOORY: It is amazing work.
Is it what the Bible is based
on, the Dead Sea Scrolls?
>>HANSON: These are the
earliest copies of the Hebrew
Bible in all of the world.
We have at least
fragments of each
and every book of
the Hebrew Bible,
not New Testament, mind you,
but the Hebrew Bible, Genesis,
Exodus--
>>NOORY: And does
this echo everything?
>>HANSON: And we have
the entire scroll
of the book of the
prophet Isaiah,
66 chapters long,
beginning to end,
found in one of those caves.
That is the centerpiece of
the whole collection, which
I've been in touch with many
times, seen it personally there
in the Shrine of
the Book Museum.
Now, that dates to
around the second century
before the Common Era,
which is the oldest
biblical text in the world.
But even that is a good five
centuries after the prophet
himself lived.
So you've got a gap of 500 years
from the days of the prophet
Isaiah until the Isaiah scroll.
Now, we've got that little
tiny seal that is our smoking
gun, if it's true--
>>NOORY: If it's true.
>>HANSON: --that
will bridge that gap.
>>NOORY: With the
scrolls, why is it
so important to try
to decipher who wrote
them, who were the originators?
>>HANSON: Ah, because that
will illumine everything
we know about this most seminal
period perhaps for the dawn
of Western culture.
Were they Pharisee-type Jews?
Were they Sadducee-type Jews?
Were they Essene-type Jews.
My own thinking, by the way, has
been shifting on all of this,
and I'm more and
more seeing them
as descendants of an Essene-type
group, who themselves
were very much
into what we would
call prophecy and mysticism.
That could be a
whole show in itself.
>>NOORY: There was a copper
scroll, wasn't there?
>>HANSON: And a
great scroll written
on pure, highly-refined
sheets of copper.
>>NOORY: Let's see that.
>>NARRATOR: The copper scroll
is unique among the Dead Sea
Scrolls, because its text was
carved on a thin copper sheet.
This method of writing was
common in the ancient world.
However, such a large scroll
written in this manner
is most unusual.
Because the copper scroll
was very badly corroded,
it remained untouched in
the central museum in Amman
for four years.
Then in 1955, it was transferred
to the Manchester College
of Technology, where
a special device
was designed by
Professor H. Wright Baker
to slice open the scroll.
The strips were later laid
side-by-side and photographed
so that they could be studied.
The choice of the more
durable medium of copper
may be explained by the
extraordinary nature
of its contents.
The copper scroll
lists 64 places
in which buried treasure
had been concealed.
Who it actually belonged
to and how it was amassed
is not known.
Several attempts have been
made to locate and excavate
the sites referred to
in the copper scroll,
some supposedly being in
Jerusalem, others at Qumran
and other sites in
the Judean desert.
One possible reason
why all these attempts
to find the treasure
have been unsuccessful
can be found in the last
lines of the copper scroll.
They refer to another, so
far undiscovered, scroll,
which is supposed to more
fully explain the location
and inventory of the treasures.
Perhaps this is not even
a list of real treasures
but merely a Utopian conception.
>>NOORY: That is
amazing, isn't it?
>>HANSON: Amazing, and to date,
not a trace of this treasure
has ever come to light,
though there are people,
even as we speak, I
know a few of them
who think they have an idea
and are looking for it.
>>NOORY: Are there more Dead
Sea Scrolls out there possibly?
>>HANSON: We never know.
That's the beauty of it.
It looks, to some,
like everything
has been found that
might possibly be found,
and yet, when you least expect
it, something will pop up.
The Israeli government
has made several attempts
to find additional
scrolls and parchments
and very little
has been yielded.
But out of nowhere, we
have a Dead Sea Stone,
as it were, that surfaced
not too many years ago.
Again, totally
unexpected, that seems
to be a Dead Sea Scroll
written on stone,
that also has certain references
to a messianic figure who
will rise in three days.
Now go figure.
>>NOORY: Same thing.
>>HANSON: Very interesting.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
Have all the Dead Sea
Scrolls that we have found
been deciphered?
>>HANSON: Yes and
no, because we've
got among them, among the
complete scrolls that we have,
we've got tens upon tens
of thousands of teeny,
tiny little
fragments and pieces,
some of them no larger than a
thumbnail or a postage stamp.
Only recently, we have a
new document pieced together
from 62 of these tiny
little fragments.
It's taken years and years
and years and years of work.
This is the world's
biggest jigsaw puzzle.
And just recently,
within the last months,
this has come forth
as a new Dead Sea
Scroll that seems to indicate
a different type of calendar,
a solar calendar, very
unusual in Judaism,
and even lists a
couple of new feasts
that are not on
the Jewish calendar
today, the Feast of Oil, New
Oil and the Feast of New Wine
and the Feast of New Wood.
And there's yet another
scroll, small document
that right now, we're
told, is being worked on,
has not yet been released.
>>NOORY: That would be exciting.
When do you think the Dead Sea
Scrolls were actually made?
>>HANSON: We're talking--
>>NOORY: What time period?
>>HANSON: Also in dispute.
One of my friends think
that they actually
date from the earliest Christian
period, the first century
of the Common Era,
first century AD.
I think they're earlier.
>>NOORY: Do you think they're
before or after Christ?
>>HANSON: Before, before.
>>NOORY: Yet, they talk
about a Christ basically.
>>HANSON: They talk about
a teacher of righteousness
who will come and basically
a messianic figure, a teacher
of righteousness, by
the way, who was slain
and yet, who will come back.
>>NOORY: Is it possible
that someone like Jesus
knew about the contents
of the Dead Sea Scrolls
and decided to act it out?
That it was like
a script for him
to become part of what
they were talking about?
>>HANSON: Ah, and that also
dovetails with this Dead Sea
Scroll in stone that talks about
this mysterious character who
will rise in three days.
We think that's the
right reading of it,
will rise in three days.
Is this perhaps a script that
the historical Jesus actually
knew of and said, this
is going to actually come
to pass in myself?
And I'm not talking as a
Christian believer or not.
We're just scholars, but
that's entirely possible
that there was this script
that Jesus was acting out.
This was a tradition that was in
place even for the past century
or more.
>>NOORY: He played the part.
>>HANSON: Yes, prior to him.
And he said, I'm the guy.
Now is the time.
>>NOORY: Would be brilliant on
his part if that's the case.
>>HANSON: Sure.
>>NOORY: I would
like to think of it
though as more
godly, wouldn't you?
>>HANSON: Well, I
tell you, there's
reason to believe that Jesus
had his own mystical side
and was in tune along
with another group.
I like to identify him
with ancient Hasidic Jews.
We know of modern Hasidic
Jews with their black coats
and black hats and side curls.
Most people don't realize there
was an ancient group of them
as well who called
God my Father.
And this is-- in Judaism,
we call this chutzpah.
It's like brazen effrontery
to call God my Father.
We don't say that, but they did.
They had that kind of intimate
connection with the divine.
And sure enough, Jesus
uses the same words
in his own mouth, my Father.
I place him in the league with
those ancient Hasidic Jews,
who were definitely seeking
for this divine connection.
There are stories of divine
healings going forth from some
of these ancient characters.
One of them, we're told,
could even bring rain.
He would stand in
a circle and refuse
to move from it until it
rained during a drought,
and sure enough, it rained.
And this is before Jesus.
So Jesus was not
the only one who
had this kind of, shall we
call it Kabbalistic or--
>>NOORY: Knowledge?
>>HANSON: --mystical yeah--
mystical side to him.
>>NOORY: Ken, exactly
what is the Torah?
And I understand you have
a little surprise for us.
>>HANSON: It gets awkwardly
translated as "the law,"
but actually, the word itself
in Hebrew means "the teaching."
It's a verbal noun.
It's how to.
It's a how to book.
How to live rightly, justly.
>>NOORY: Is it their Bible?
>>HANSON: It's the
heart of the Bible.
The Bible for Jews
consists of the Torah,
that is the books of Moses,
Genesis through Deuteronomy,
the Pentateuch.
It's just the Jewish
word for Pentateuch.
And secondly, the
prophets, that's
Isaiah and his whole gang, and
then assorted writings, psalms,
proverbs, and so on.
And all together,
it's what Christians
call the Old Testament,
what Jews call the Tanakh,
but at the heart of it
is the Torah, the law.
>>NOORY: Let's take a look
at what you brought us.
>>HANSON: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Well, through
the magic of television,
we have brought you
a 200-year-old Torah
that Dr. Ken Hanson is
going to talk with us about.
Ken, this is magnificent, and
the feel of this parchment,
what is this?
>>HANSON: This is called vellum.
It's the skin of
a kosher animal.
It can be cow, sheep,
deer, even reindeer,
as long as it's a kosher animal
and it cannot be killed just
for its skin.
But the animal is slaughtered
ritually for eating purposes,
and then the skin is taken.
It's soaked in a solution of
lime, lime solution for some 18
days and then brought out and
cut into individual pieces.
Each one called a [HEBREW]
and then sewn together.
>>NOORY: Sewn together.
>>HANSON: And this was composed
about two centuries ago,
about two centuries ago.
>>NOORY: Now, the original
Torah is thousands of years old.
So why is this
only 200 years old?
>>HANSON: Which, of
course, we don't have,
because our texts only go back
as far as the Dead Sea Scrolls.
>>NOORY: So this is the copy of.
>>HANSON: So copy of
copy of copy of copy,
and that's the way it goes.
>>NOORY: Who made it?
>>HANSON: An anonymous scribe
living somewhere in Ukraine.
>>NOORY: It might have taken
him forever to do this.
>>HANSON: It takes about--
>>NOORY: This is
all done by hand.
>>HANSON: It takes
about three years
to write one of these entirely
by hand, three years of labor.
And every letter must be
written exactly perfectly.
If a mistake is
found anywhere, it
can be corrected, one letter.
If a second mistake is found,
it can also be corrected.
There's a little stylus used
to shave it off and write
in the correct letter.
If three mistakes are found,
three strikes and you're out.
The whole thing--
>>NOORY: Is gone.
>>HANSON: You have to
start all over again.
And that's why the text has
remained remarkably stable
for thousands of years.
Even the Dead Sea Scrolls,
it's almost word-for-word
identical to what
has come down to us.
>>NOORY: Yeah, it's amazing.
It's huge.
Now, look, I'm a Roman Catholic.
You're Jewish.
Why are we wearing
yarmulkes right now?
>>HANSON: Well, we want to,
according to Jewish tradition,
recognize that the divine
is above all of us.
And we have to pay due
respect to that reality.
We are who we are,
and God is above.
So we cover our heads out
of respect and deference
and especially reading the
divine word, the divine Torah.
>>NOORY: Ken, we have a
couple of minutes left.
Just give us a little highlight
of what some of this means.
>>HANSON: I have
this open to what
is my favorite part
of the entire Torah.
Of course, Isaiah
talked about the Torah.
He said "out of Zion
shall go forth the Torah."
[SPEAKING HEBREW], right?
Well, I've got this open
to my favorite part.
This is the middle of
the Book of Exodus.
This is the crossing
of the Red Sea.
>>NOORY: And you can read this?
>>HANSON: Absolutely.
Of course, I lived in Israel.
So any modern Israeli can
get up close and personal
and cuddle up with this text
and read it like a newspaper.
>>NOORY: Talks about the
parting of the Red Sea.
>>HANSON: Parting
of the Red Sea.
And every Torah
everywhere in the world
is written with the same
three-column calligraphy
right at this point.
And you can see the
Israelites passing
through the parted
waters of the Red Sea.
See the way it's written here
in this beautiful artsy manner?
So here we have
what the text says.
Now, I cannot touch
the text itself.
It's divine.
It's a holy text.
>>NOORY: But you can
touch it with this.
>>HANSON: So a special
instrument called a [HEBREW]..
It means "a hand."
can be used as a pointer.
It has to be made of a very fine
metal, silver, in this case.
And we read--
[SPEAKING HEBREW]
And so Moses and the children
of Israel sang this song.
And what was the
song that they sang?
[SPEAKING HEBREW]
I will sing to the
Lord, to the eternal,
for He has greatly triumphed.
This is at the Red Sea now.
>>NOORY: He's parted
it by this point?
>>HANSON: Yeah.
[SPEAKING HEBREW]
Famous passage, the
horse and the rider
are cast into the sea.
And you see the
waters of the sea
open, the Israelites
passing through.
>>NOORY: Boy, that's
an amazing story,
and you know they have found
remnants of chariots in the Red
Sea, that is unbelievable.
>>HANSON: The archeology
is all over this area,
and it's a story
in its own right.
And also contested,
I should add,
because our
minimalist friends say
there probably was no exodus.
Well, we'll get into that.
>>NOORY: And the parting of
the sea itself, a lot of people
have said that there was some
kind of climatological event
that changed it.
What do you think
really happened?
Come on now.
You mean, a guy actually
stood up, waved his staff,
and the sea divided.
And then the Egyptians
came rushing through.
>>HANSON: The
chronology is key here.
We'd have to really go into
depth about the chronology.
When did it happen?
Did it happen in the
1200s BC or the 1400s BC?
I'm shifting my mind
on that, as well,
and going earlier
in the chronology,
because there was a terrific
cataclysm that took place
in the Mediterranean Sea on the
island we call today Santorini,
a massive volcanic
eruption, 10 times more
powerful than
Krakatoa that would
have sent unbelievable tsunamis
all across the Mediterranean.
Would have darkened
the sky, caused
meteorological phenomena.
>>NOORY: Sure.
They think Atlantis
may have been there.
>>HANSON: Yes, I've been
to Santorini many times,
and I'm sure, in fact,
that this is the origin
of the story of Atlantis.
>>NOORY: So his
timing was perfect.
>>HANSON: Well, it
could be, depending
on when we date that explosion.
We're working on it.
It's very complex
stuff that we're into,
but that kind of
event could certainly
have produced the cataclysm
that we're talking about when
it comes to the exodus.
>>NOORY: Ken, that's fantastic.
Thank you for being
on the program.
>>HANSON: It's wonderful.
It's exciting.
That's what I live for.
It's in the blood.
>>NOORY: This is an amazing
artifact, It really is.
And the fact that I'm so close
actually touching and holding
the Torah, even though this
one is only 200 years old,
is amazing.
It truly is.
>>HANSON: Just a baby, right?
>>NOORY: But end times
prophecy, biblical
prophecy has fascinated me
since I was a little boy.
It's kind of scary
when you think
about the Book of Revelation
and what could happen.
Let's hope that it's hundreds of
years away but even then, Ken,
I don't wish it on anybody.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC]